#summary Mcollective with Gentoo
#labels migrated

= This wiki has migrated to [http://marionette-collective.org/] = 

= Introduction =

For those of you who are running Gentoo Linux, we maintain ebuilds for stomp and mcollective within our public portage overlay.  Here is information on how to access those ebuilds and install mcollective from within portage.

= Installing the local ebuild =
You can either clone the Arces portage overlay, or you can extract the ebuild directly into your own overlay.  

== Cloning the Arces overlay ==
The standard location for local portage overlays is `/usr/local/portage` on Gentoo systems.  Our overlay is designed to fit with the multiple-overlay system introduced by Layman, although it's not part of the Layman repository list.  You can clone the repository with Git from `http://support.arces.net/public/git/arces_overlay.git`.

{{{
[06:59 AM] 82 [~]:adrian% cd /usr/local/portage
[06:59 AM] 83 [/usr/local/portage]:adrian% sudo git clone http://support.arces.net/public/git/arces_overlay.git
Initialized empty Git repository in /usr/local/portage/arces_overlay/.git/
}}}

Adjust `make.conf` to include the new overlay.

{{{
PORTDIR_OVERLAY="/usr/local/portage"
PORTDIR_OVERLAY="$PORTDIR_OVERLAY /usr/local/portage/arces_overlay"
}}}

Update the `eix` cache.

{{{
[07:06 AM] 93 [/usr/local/portage]:adrian% sudo eix-update
Reading Portage settings ..
Building database (/var/cache/eix) ..
[0] "gentoo" /usr/portage/ (cache: metadata-flat)
     Reading category 154|154 (100%) Finished             
[1] "" /usr/local/portage (cache: parse|ebuild*#metadata-flat#assign)
     Reading category 154|154 (100%) EMPTY!
[2] "" /usr/local/portage/arces_overlay (cache: parse|ebuild*#metadata-flat#assign)
     Reading category 154|154 (100%) Finished        
Applying masks ..
Calculating hash tables ..
Writing database file /var/cache/eix ..
Database contains 14181 packages in 154 categories.
}}}

At this point you should see the mcollective and stomp packages in portage.

{{{
* app-admin/mcollective [1]
     Available versions:  (~)0.4.4-r1{tbz2} (~)0.4.7{tbz2} {-client +server}
     Homepage:            http://code.google.com/p/mcollective
     Description:         Common elements of the Marionette Collective management suite.

* dev-ruby/stomp [1]
     Available versions:  (~)1.1{tbz2} {doc}
     Homepage:            http://stomp.codehaus.org/Ruby+Client
     Description:         A Stomp client written in Ruby.

[1] /usr/local/portage/arces_overlay
}}}

We recommend that you add a cron job to run `git pull` once a day from within the overlay directory to keep it up to date.

== Extracting the ebuild into your own overlay ==
If you have your own local portage overlay and would only like to add the ebuilds for mcollective and stomp, you can do so by retrieving them from the [http://code.google.com/p/mcollective/downloads/list Downloads] page.  Extract them into your local portage overlay directory.  The mcollective package is part of `app-admin` and the stomp package is part of `dev-ruby`.  The category directories are included in the tarballs, so please extract them from within the top of your local portage overlay.

Once that's done, please update the `eix` cache as described above, and you should see the packages.

= Installing mcollective =
== Keywords ==
The packages are masked as unstable because they are not part of the Gentoo portage tree.  You can unmask them by adding the following lines to `/etc/portage/package.keywords`, replacing `~arch` with your architecture (`~x86`, `~amd64`, etc).

{{{
dev-ruby/stomp ~arch
app-admin/mcollective ~arch
}}}

== Use flags ==
You can install mcollective as a client, a server, or both through the portage use flags.  On most of your hosts you'll install mcollective only as a server, which is the default if no use flags are set.  On one or more administrative nodes, you'll want to install mcollective as a client to install the executable files that allow you to interact with all of the remote nodes.  Set these flags in `/etc/portage/package.use`.

{{{
app-admin/mcollective -client server
}}}

== Installation ==
You may now install mcollective and stomp with `emerge` as you would with any other package.
