#summary Registering nodes to a central inventory
#labels registration,migrated

= Introduction =

We support the ability for each node to register with a central inventory, we don't use the inventory internally for anything it's there are a framework to enable you to build inventory systems or WebUI's.

= Details =

Registration plugins are easy to write and you can configure your nodes to use your own or the provided one.  All Registration plugins must inherit from _MCollective::Registration::Base_ to ensure they get loaded into the plugin system.

The one we provide simply sends a list of agents to the inventory, it is called _agentlist_ and can be seen in its entirety below:

{{{
module MCollective
    module Registration
        # A registration plugin that simply sends in the list of agents we have
        class Agentlist<Base
            def body
                MCollective::Agents.agentlist
            end
        end
    end
end
}}}

You can see it's very simple, you just need to provide a _body_ method and it's return value will be sent to the registration agent(s)

To configure it to be used you just need the following in your config:

{{{
registerinterval = 300
registration = Agentlist
}}}

This will cause the plugin to be called every 300 seconds.

We do not provide the receiving end of this in the core mcollective, you only need to write an agent called _registration_ and do whatever you want with the data you receive from all the nodes.  You can find [http://code.google.com/p/mcollective-plugins/wiki/AgentRegistrationMonitor a simple monitoring system] built using this method at mcollective-plugins as an example.

You need to note a few things about these agents:

 * They need to be fast, you'll receive a lot of registration messages if your agent will talk to a database that is slow you'll run into problems
 * They should not return anything other than _nil_, the mcollective server will interpret _nil_ from an agent as an indication that you do not want to send back any reply.  Replying to registration requests is almost always undesired.

There's nothing preventing you from running more than one type of receiving agent in your collective, you can have one on your monitor server as above and another with completely different code on a web server feeding a local cache for your web interfaces.  As long as both agents are called _registration_ you'll be fine, this means though you can't run more than one type on the same server.