#summary Full Release History
#labels Featured

= Introduction =

This is a list of release notes for various releases, you should review these before upgrading as any potential problems and backward incompatible changes will be highlighted here.

<wiki:toc max_depth="3" />
== 0.4.4 - 2010/04/03 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ==
This release is mostly a bug fix release.

We've cleaned up the logs a bit so you'll see fewer exceptions logged, also if you have Rails + Puppet on a node the logs will stay in the standard format.  We are handling some exceptions better which has improved stability of the registration system.

If you do some slow queries in your discovery agent you can bump the timeout up in the config using _plugin.discovery.timeout_.

All the scripts now use _/usr/bin/env ruby_ rather than hardcoded paths to deal better with Ruby's in weird places.

Several other small annoyances was fixed or improved.

=== mc-controller ===
We've always had a tool that let you control a network of mcollective instances remotely, it lagged behind a bit with the core, we've fixed it up and documented it in [ControllingTheDaemon].  You can use it to reload agents from disk without restarting the daemon for example or get stats or shut down the entire mcollective network.

=== Backwards Compatibility ===
No changes that impacts backward compatibility has been made.

=== Changes ===
|| *Date* || *Descriptions* ||
|| 2010/03/27 || Make it easier to construct SimpleRPC requests to use with the standard client library - #60 ||
|| 2010/03/27 || Manipulating the filters via the helper methods will force rediscovery - #59 ||
|| 2010/03/23 || Prevent Activesupport when brought in by Facter from breaking our logs - #57 ||
|| 2010/03/23 || Clean up logging for messages not targeted at us - #56 ||
|| 2010/03/19 || Add exception handling to the registration base class - #55 ||
|| 2010/03/03 || Use /usr/bin/env ruby instead of hardcoded paths - #54||
|| 2010/02/17 || Improve mc-controller and document it - #46||
|| 2010/02/08 || Remove some close coupling with Stomp to easy creating of other connectors - #49||
|| 2010/02/01 || Made the discovery agent timeout configurable using plugin.discovery.timeout - #48||
|| 2010/01/25 || mc-controller now correctly loads/reloads agents. - #45||
|| 2010/01/25 || Building packages has been improved to ensure rdocs are always included - #44 ||


== 0.4.3 - 2010/01/24 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ==
This release fixes a few bugs and introduce a major new SimpleRPC feature for [SimpleRPCAuditing auditing] requests.

=== Auditing ===
We've created an [SimpleRPCAuditing auditing framework for SimpleRPC], each request gets passed to an audit plugin for processing.  We ship one that simply logs to a file on each node and there's a [http://code.google.com/p/mcollective-plugins/wiki/AuditCentralRPCLog community plugin] that logs everything on a central logging host.

In future we might add auditing to the client libraries so requests will be logged where they are sent as well as auditing of replies being sent, this will be driven by requests from the community though.

=== New _fail!_ method for SimpleRPC ===
Till now while writing agents you can use the [SimpleRPCAgents#Reply_Status fail] method to set statusses in the reply, this however did not also raise exceptions and terminate execution of the agent immediately.

Often the existing behavior is required but it did lead to some awkward code when you did want to just exit the agent immediately as well as set a fail status.  We've added a _fail!_ method that works just like _fail_ except it stops execution of your agent immediately.

=== Backwards Compatibility ===
No changes that impacts backward compatibility has been made.

=== Changes ===
|| *Date* || *Descriptions* ||
|| 2010/01/23 || Handle ctrl-c during discovery without showing exceptions to users - #34 ||
|| 2010/01/21 || Force all facts in the YAML fact source to be strings - #41 ||
|| 2010/01/19 || Add [SimpleRPCAuditing audit logging] to SimpleRPC clients and Agents ||
|| 2010/01/18 || The SRPM we provide will now build outside of the Rake environment - #40||
|| 2010/01/18 || Add a _fail!_ method to RPC::Agent - #37||
|| 2010/01/18 || mc-rpc can now be used without supplying arguments - #38 ||
|| 2010/01/18 || Don't raise an error if no user/pass is given to the stomp connector, try unauthenticated mode - #35||
|| 2010/01/17 || Improve error message when Regex validation failed on SimpleRPC input - #36||

 
== 0.4.2 - 2010/01/14 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ===
This release fixes a few bugs, add some command line improvements and brings major changes to the Debian packaging.

==== Packaging ====
Firstly we've had some amazing work done by Riccardo Setti to make us Debian packages that complies with Debian and Ubuntu policy, this release use these new packages.  It has some unfortunate changes to file layout detailed below but overall I think it's a big win to get us in line with Distribution policies and standards.

The only major change is that in the past we used _/usr/libexec/mcollective_ as the libdir, but Debian does not have this directory and it is not in the LFHS anymore so we now use _/usr/share/mcollective/plugins_ as the lib dir.  You need to move your plugins there and update both client and server configs.

The RedHat packages will move to this convention too in the next release since I think it's the better location and complies with LFHS.

==== Command Line Improvements ====
We've streamlined the command line a bit, nothings changed we've just added some flags.

The _--with-class_, _--with-fact_, _--with-agent_ and _--with-identity_ now all have a short form _-C_, _-F_, _-A_ and _-I_ respectively.

We've added a new filter option _--with_ and a short form _-W_ that combines _--with-class_ and _--with-fact_ into one filter type, use case would be:

{{{
$ mc-find-hosts -W "/centreon/ country=de roles::dev_server/"
}}}

This would find hosts with class regex matched _/centreon/_, class _roles::dev_server_ and fact matching _country=de_.  Hopefully this saves on some typing.

You can also now set the environment variables _MCOLLECTIVE_TIMEOUT_ and _MCOLLECTIVE_DTIMEOUT_ which saves you from typing _--timeout_ and _--discovery-timeout_ often, especially useful on very fast networks.

==== Other fixes and improvements ====

 * We've added the COPYING file to all the packages
 * We've made the init script more LSB compliant
 * A bug related to discovery in SimpleRPC was fixed

=== Backwards Compatibility ===
The only backwards issue is the Debian packages.  They've been tested to upgrade cleanly but you need to change the config as above.

=== Changes ===
|| *Date* || *Descriptions* ||
|| *2010/01/13* || *Release version 0.4.2* ||
|| 2010/01/13 || New packaging for Debian provided by Riccardo Setti - #29||
|| 2010/01/07 || Improved LSB compliance of the init script - thanks Riccardo Setti - #32||
|| 2010/01/07 || Multiple calls to SimpleRPC client would reset discovered hosts - #31||
|| 2010/01/04 || Timeouts can now be changed with MCOLLECTIVE_TIMEOUT and MCOLLECTIVE_DTIMEOUT environment vars - #25||
|| 2010/01/04 || Specify class and fact filters easier with the new -W or --with option - #27 ||
|| 2010/01/04 || Added COPYING file to RPMs and tarball - #28||
|| 2010/01/04 || Make shorter filter options -C, -I, -A and -F - #26||

== 0.4.1 - 2010/01/02 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ===
This is a bug fix release to address some shortcomings and issues found in [SimpleRPCIntroduction Simple RPC].

The main issue is around handling of meta data in agents, the documented approach did not work, we've now solved this by adding a number of hooks into the processing of Simple RPC agents - see [SimpleRPCAgents#Meta_Data_and_Initialization Meta Data and Initialization] and [SimpleRPCAgents#Processing_Hooks Processing Hooks].

We've also made logging and config retrieval a bit easier in agents - and documented this.  See [SimpleRPCAgents#Agent_Configuration Agent Configuration] and [SimpleRPCAgents#Logging Logging]

You can now call the _mc-rpc_ command a bit easier:

{{{
$ mc-rpc --agent helloworld --action echo --argument msg="hello world"
$ mc-rpc helloworld echo msg="hello world"
}}}

The 2 calls are the same, you can pass as many arguments in _key=val_ pairs as needed at the end.

=== Backwards Compatibility ===
No issues with backward compatibility, should be a simple upgrade.

=== Changes ===
|| *Date* || *Descriptions* ||
|| 2010/01/02 || Added hooks to plug into the processing of requests, also enabled setting meta data and timeouts - #14||
|| 2010/01/02 || Created readers for @config and @logger in the SimpleRPC agent - #23||
|| 2009/12/30 || Don't send out any requests if no nodes were discovered - #17||
|| 2009/12/30 || Added :discovered and :discovered_nodes to client stats - #20||
|| 2009/12/30 || Add a empty_filter? helper to the RPC mixin - #18||
|| 2009/12/30 || Fix formatting bug with progress bar - #21||
|| 2009/12/29 || Simplify mc-rpc command line - #16||
|| 2009/12/29 || Fix layout issue when printing hosts that did not respond - #15||


== 0.4.0 - 2009/12/29 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ===
This release introduced a major new feature - [SimpleRPCIntroduction Simple RPC] - a framework for easily building clients and agents.  More than that it's a set of conventions and standards that will help us build generic clients like web based ones capable of talking to all agents.

We think this feature is ready for wide use, it's well documented and we've done extensive testing.  We'll be porting some of our own code over to it once this release is out and we do anticipate there might be some _0.4.x_ releases to round off a few issues that might remain.  We do not currently have any open tickets against Simple RPC.

We've also added the ability to create more complex queries such as:

{{{
--with-class /dev_server/ --with-class /rails/
}}}

This does an _AND_ operation on the puppet classes on the node and finds only nodes with both _/dev_server/_ *AND* _/rails/_ classes.  This new functionality applies to all types of filter.

We've made the _--with-class_ filters more generic in comments, documentation etc with an eye to be more usable in Chef and other Configuration Management environments - see [UsingWithChef].

=== Backwards Compatibility ===
Unfortunately introducing the new filtering methods has some backward compatibility issues, if you had clients/agents with code like:

{{{
options[:filter]["agent"] = "some agent"
}}}

You should now change that to:

{{{
options[:filter]["agent"] << "some agent"
}}}

As each filter is an array now.  If you do not change the code it will still work as before but you will not be able to use the compound filtering feature on filter types that you've forced to be a string and there might be some other undesired side effects.  We've tried though to at least not break old code, they just can't use the new features.

You were also able to test easily in the past if you're running unfiltered using 
something like:

{{{
if options[:filter] == {}
}}}

Now that's much harder and we've added a helper to make this easier:

{{{
if MCollective::Util.empty_filter?(options[:filter])
}}}

This new method is compatible with both the old and new filter method so you can start using it before you finish the first issue mentioned here.

We've also made the class filter more generic, in the past you did class filters like this:

{{{
options[:filter]["puppet_class"] << /apache/
}}}

Now you have to adjust it to:

{{{
options[:filter]["cf_class"] << /apache/
}}}

Old code will keep working but you should change to this name for filters to be consistent with the rest of the code base.

=== Changes ===
|| *Date* || *Descriptions* ||
|| 2009/12/28 || Add support for other configuration management systems like chef in the --with-class filters - #13||
|| 2009/12/28 || Add a _Util.empty`_`filter?_ to test for an empty filter||
|| 2009/12/27 || Create a new client framework [SimpleRPCIntroduction] - #6||
|| 2009/12/27 || Add support for multiple filters of the same type -  #3||

== 0.3.0 - 2009/12/17 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ===
Primarily a bug fix release.  Only new feature is to allow the user to create _MCollective::Util::`*`_ classes and put those in the plugins directory.  This is useful for more complex agents and clients.

=== Backwards Compatibility ===
This release should not break any older code, if it does it's a bug.

=== Changes ===
|| *Date* || *Descriptions* ||
|| *2009/12/17* || *Release version 0.3.0* ||
||2009/12/16||Improvements for newer versions of Ruby where TERM signal was not handled - #7||
||2009/12/07||MCollective::Util is now a module and plugins can drop in util classes in the plugin dir||
||2009/12/07||The Rakefile now works with rake provided on Debian 4 systems - #2||
||2009/12/07||Improvements in the RC script for Debian and older Ubuntu systems - #5||

== 0.2.0 - 2009/12/02 ==
=== Release Focus and Notes ===
First numbered release

=== Backwards Compatibility ==
n/a

=== Changes ===
n/a